darian welcome to my school of hard sons
and this is a third level academic
institution specifically set up with one
task in mind
find out when tackling a series of
practical problems which is better that
you find some clever approach them smart
maxi basting or to just hammer it out by
trial and error by brute force this show
is a classic battle of brains versus
brawn because when it comes to solving
problems I'm a firm believer in using
maths I love math it can solve pretty
much any problem from saving lines or
placing a bet to surviving a zombie
apocalypse try to I'll be using brain
work and some pens to tackle three
genuine real-world problems set by
Oxford professor Marcus is so tight and
my comedy guests will be using their
brawn or whatever else is lying around
to try and do the same we've got a
couple of math students present to keep
me on my toes because none of us have
seen the questions and we might not get
an answer at all but first let's meet
this week's guest
how are you it just gives you a ringer
in this situation do have any
mathematics background any kind of
science background no I don't really I
don't like it I'm already things like
football and kissing okay definitely
didn't either or by the way is a large
part of what we want to get across here
is that it's not you know a mono street
you go into a choice about six maths or
six in football I mean all those
triangles you fàbregas passing this
numbers to even do the score back yeah
no I yeah I think when they're kicking
that ball and what I mean ii think is
angles no they're mainly thinking well
there'd be the velocity momentum yeah
they think of space yeah fine expected
level but you do like the all octane
take some arid dry you know perceived as
not cool types of defied to latin the
university said i thought was spoken in
latin america there was a shock when you
were going everyoneís because it's now
dead except for the pope that was
upsetting yeah so yeah no I think the
Platinum at I think actually mastered
karate
they're all kind of very sides of the
same yeah greatly shaped a normal life
you don't use them if you do people
think you're a bit odd markets you have
problems for us but they're usually
group doing a team yeah we've seen today
which is the mass of saving lives okay
what is the first part yes I got a
warm-up question to get the the brain
cells firing and this one is about
poison so I've got some poison from the
table here
and you're gonna use with a mess to stop
yourself being poisoned okay so one of
these glasses
contains poison the other three are safe
okay and you've got to try and find out
which one of these is poison cause I'm
gonna get you to drink the other three
okay get it wrong this is a very short
show yeah I hate poison we've got two
test tubes here yeah when I shine this
light it will tell you which of these
test tubes has poisoned and I can only
use this light once to detect the poison
where the poison is at which of these
tests use we're gonna do it practically
the guy has got a you know poison
himself but you're safe over there just
waiting he's already got variable so
what we've got here are four dresses and
we know one of them is poison all you
have to detect the poison are two test
tubes and a one chance only poison
detecting light how do you find the
point I'm drawing the pictures of
containers of this in there okay going
in really yeah okay so I think this is
all about some in the test tube which is
my favorite oh it has been my favorite
type of tube the test you so can you
shine your light on that night oh no I'm
only out to do it once so you want to
try it now yeah yeah sorry
right can I ask a question yeah is early
it can we put different amounts here you
can put different amounts in but it
won't make any difference because it's a
kind of really yeah one sorry that is
all now rubbish right okay okay this is
possible I'll tell you there is a way to
do it well I think you have to put two
in one of them so say if I put that one
in there and that one in there mmm-hmm I
just go let's see that's okay say you
want to put so that means if you if you
shot in China in that one and it says
this is a poison that I know it's one of
these two
yeah so should I put one of these two in
that one as well well that's that's
you're on fire is that battle good
that's good in this kind of game where
we know I think well I think this one
yeah I was gonna go for it go for it in
this one as well yeah so that's going
both them yes so if you shine the light
of that yeah and they start this light
up then it's definitely that one very
good if one lights up it's that yeah
that my stuff is that and if none then
it's that okay let's have a game studio
lights so there is poison in this
density of hearing none in that one
there so I think that means it's that
correct very good well Alex so can you
explain Zahra what if the mathematics
behind it no I just wrote four cups to
chest tubes put a one B another and C
invoked and D is they're more profound
more general solution found a bit of
mathematics behind this which is the
mathematics of binary numbers so binary
numbers you can only use zeros and ones
great for computing so what are we gonna
do is to give these cups names you call
them ABC ya and D but I'm gonna call
them
0 1 2 3 but I'm gonna write it in binary
so 0 in binary is 0 0 yeah
cop 1 is 0 1 but I now can't write two
because you're only now series and 1 so
I carry up so this cup is 1 0 and this
cup is cup 3 which is 1 1 11 exactly so
binary is a way of expressing any number
using just zeros and ones if we number
the glasses 0 1 2 & 3 then in binary
they look like this let's say each
column of numbers represents a test tube
if there's a 1 in the test tube let me
add a liquid from that glass drink 3 is
in both test shoots only drink 2 is the
left test tube and only drink one is in
the right half chief now when we shine
the light in the tubes is both flow then
we know it's drink 3 if none go it's 0
and if the only one tube we know which
drink that is as well represented here
is if you put so we go this way don't
put any of this one in put this one in
the unit's column so this is a binary
number but this one in the two's column
and this one in both of them you read it
off you actually get the binary
representation of the number to which
okay did you use some binary numbers
over there we didn't use binary no yeah
that's easy I'm not seeing anybody
yeah what's our lesson so this question
it's all about a burning beach hut so
this problem is all about turn saving
lives again using some maths but now
you've got to save somebody from a
burning beach hut because you're saying
yourself on the beach enjoying yourself
and sunny you notice this beach hut on
fire on the other side of the beach now
you're gonna put out the fire
you've got to get some water so the
question is that how to put out the fire
in the quickest way in fact I've got a
little Solaria set up on the
we can Wow this is for you Alex to do
some I've never been to the beach never
been on a boat don't trust boats and mum
wouldn't let me go him because of the
grains per game under my nails she said
she kept saying we'll go onto your nails
Alex we're not going it's not none of
this is true the beach of a wall between
the sand and sea right there's many
things which are not representative of a
beach yeah yeah you are yeah you've been
there too long yeah and you've a really
large book at the I do at the flame so
you have to get to there via there
that's right you've got to find you know
where you're gonna hit do you head
straight to the water or you so that's
the question what's the best place to
aim for well I'm sure I read that salt
water is flammable is it yeah I'm there
it's a mathematical word triangles is it
go triangle okay
could be yeah triangles is a
mathematical yeah I think we play break
it or no I guess it would so straight
lines are good on those straight lines
shortest distant that's the definition
of a straight line shortest distance
between two points so straight lines are
good but I'm thinking for some reason
yeah that should be a right angle
writing why would I be thinking that
okay just because I know it's like
Pythagoras line yeah go triangle and
that's kind of Greek maybe you think
that kind of Greek theme ancient Greek
theme is yeah yeah that's yeah the key
say we did this at 90 degrees let's see
what what effect that would have
can I just say what I'd do in real life
yeah because I wouldn't turn to math I
would just have screens all right okay I
think I would sort of yeah I think I was
running in the direction of this I think
I don't think I know what to do here
Marcus well we'll leave them working for
a while and take a break we'll be back
with a solution that particular problem
and a big problem for this week the one
we had to send Alex had to do some stuff
on which is why he ended up doing
disabled
you
welcome back the Darwin's School of Arts
the program fits me using brains against
my fellow karmic using brawn in this
case it's Alex horn in a battle to find
out which method is best for solving the
problems of modern life throws at us all
these two are still trying to work out
what the quickest way to get to a
burning Cabana is less fun of they've
got an answer una cosa no it's still
very much an inferno
sorry about that dog okay yeah time's
running out yes for this portal you make
us see here the muted screams well yeah
this is what a snooker shot a pool shot
would bounce off that and hit - exactly
it might not exactly well yeah can I
then do this sort of thing yeah you
can't you can do all of that
yeah it's you know you're lining up
things this is my it's once on the
ground I mean if I keep one foot on the
ground and Snooky well when you paint a
shop well no when you're lining up you
can levitate when you're lining up you
can you can actually mount the referee
anyway now we're just looking at there's
a white ball there and a red ball there
yeah this is great
we'll put in terms you can understand
that but can I put spin on the man no
you have to make it him right in the
middle of his cue ball are you going to
any time because the point where you're
gonna hate this are you know they were
set up to be nice
how would you self yes think Tori hitter
is Alyssa let's do some it's instinct
that's what you meant to be doing
it's gut yeah well that's not gumption
yeah let's go from yeah let's go for
that one
so good so that that's your snooker
shots I feel like some angles should be
equal to other angles that's six inches
yeah I do I quickly do any of these kind
of things same stupid table is you
reflect us around the board right you
pretend that the thing isn't there we
saw what you do is right so that if
that's if that's what the house is there
right and it's be from here like
whatever distance you just presume on
the same line
carry it out so it out there all right
and then because it's exactly the same
thing you go from there to there and
that gives you the point I would you
have to bounce basically your flipper
and I'm just getting a while oh yeah you
get a friend to swim out the exact it's
the - I don't fine yeah you look at them
you're set on fire there's no need for
the lineup to be on fire doofy if you
put a light on fire it there the
saltwater would go on fire
we go and the whole thing begun but that
gives you the angle where bounces around
yeah I like then you've written the word
help on yours mine has a definite set of
parallel and that is flame mark meaning
danger rather than humor yes exactly
okay so that's how you do you find it
you find it when you're best off that's
all very well and good Marcus Moreland
give us a problem we can really go
cheating you're in a wetsuit just for
the break any particular reason for that
I've never been in a wetsuit before and
I think I'll pull it off and I really
enjoyed the sensations that it provided
Thomas with it and they've gathered
everything gathered everything in that
yeah yeah so just yeah there were some
bulges yeah anyway I am also thinking I
don't make it all about me but I think I
look really good in a little swimming
hat nice very very good houses possibly
elephant to the bottom because alex is
actually saving somebody's life he was
playing the lifeguard in this problem
yeah and what you've got to do is you
suddenly it's a holiday from he'll this
one because you've got to save another
life you're at the pool you've certainly
seen somebody in distress holiday in
which a Cabana too wet on fire that's
right so the cabanas gonna fire at you
retire to the pool yeah you've retired a
pool hoping to finish that novel and
unfortunately there's somebody in
distress in a swimming pool
that's show just of people to see what
it's actually physically looks like yeah
see this here so you can find them
you'll hear yeah you wake up I'm reading
this any girl which is dragon for a face
which I've been meaning to read you for
ages so finally getting around to
reading that you're 2 metres away from
the edge of the pool yeah from this
point here to the where the person is
lined up that 75 meters yep and then the
person who's in distress is 25 meters in
okay
you can run twice as fast as you can
swim fun you have to calculate where is
the best place to plunge into the water
to be able to rescue this poor person in
distress right to person drowning here
lifeguard here running is twice as fast
as swimming
what's the biggest
any word is duck dive gracefully rather
than plunged I've done this and you'll
see it's did you see I slip in let's
have a look this is Alex attending this
problem you won't catch me doing any
calculations or something so I'm gonna
be working this out using trial and
error a lot of error in case you're
wondering I'm gonna be noting down how
long each attempt takes me so eventually
we can come up with an answer to the
ripping at 75 meters along just a case
of 25 meters out right this is Jeremy
for real dummy in distress doesn't look
that distress he's the type that bottle
things up right then Here I am in real
swimming pool in a real wet suits about
risk to a real dummy in distress this
man here who is a proper lifeguard
assembly people to keeping an eye on me
health and safety is very important
obviously this is top gear so we all
know we're not allowed to run at the
swimming pool or do bombing or petting
or forge but I have scientific
discipline session today so I will be
running
I'm pretty or for this so I can't help
thinking that running would be quicker
all right then I've got runs it's two
below bronze I've got some pebble so
what's my try next bit more runny bit
less swimmy
I'm species for swimming really that's
the trouble
now fish are really good exactly walking
on brilliant rice to some weight I got
excited here we got a laugh you okay
fine do that please yeah I think this is
a really tough problem do you have any
sort of ideas about how to do this well
the trouble is that are you saw in the
video the Hat was so tight it's very
hard to think I was just thinking save
Jeremy you know but you did get the idea
that you got to run further presumably
than your swimming because you're
swimming but it's judging exactly that
distance and I think Darren's gonna be
pushed into some pretty tough equations
to work this out actually the answer to
this problem is all of our trainers it
may not be very sensible worth some sort
of outboard motor
but if Alex swims the maximum distance a
triangle with the right angle on one
corner a bit of old-school trigonometry
would tell us how far he had traveled
add in the speed of which he swims and
you can work out how long it'll take him
then any other combination of running
and swimming can be worked over the same
way with two triangles one for the
distance he runs and one for the
distance he swims add in the speeds you
have a total rescue time so that's how
you work out rescue time for one entry
point next we need to find a faster
route thankful you're gonna see a bit of
calculus appearing on telly again it was
invented by two different people
independently one was Isaac Newton he
came up with the character sand but he
was very miffed because Godfrey Clive
nits in Germany came up with the same
idea at exactly the same time and there
was this bitter dispute about who
discovered it first and he just on the
side me and David rocky came up with the
same joke at the same time and a similar
right yeah
so you're still fighting over there yeah
the joke is too soft on telly yeah it's
plain it's yours yeah weddings are
expensive so we had our sponsored by
phone company service no reception
that's a joke did you do any calculus in
school I don't think so I did sort of
mess a little bit mess
all right so here's a little calculation
for you
what is 0/0 is it the Mexican riding a
bike 0/0 yeah I think when you do it on
your calculator it says just when it the
letter e says yeah yeah it's an error
funny thing is very difficult questions
doesn't really have an answer and what
the point is that calculus makes sense
of this answer now you can use the
campus if you're accelerating a car and
you're trying to get to a 60 miles per
hour and fast this time while you're
accelerating but all the time your speed
is constantly changing so if you do time
against distance mm-hmm so your speed is
always changing so if you say at one
particular time how fast you going how
do you make sense of that and because
remember speed is distance divided by
time miles per hour
yeah miles per hour yeah you might say
well what's the average distance between
these two points I can take well if this
takes me a certain amount of time T and
in that time I've gone a distance D that
will give you the average speed but I
want for the exact speed at this
particular time it's a lovely graph it's
really good yeah a calculus makes sense
of this because that's the time gets
smaller and smaller and smaller so if
you think about the speed is distance
over time uh-huh well it's time gets
smaller and smaller and smaller the
distance is getting smaller and smaller
and smaller
so eventually uhit's having to calculate
zero over zero but Newton and Leibniz
made sense of this and this actually
tells you the instantaneous speed of
your car as you're accelerating from
nought to 60 right without the calculus
you'll be able to tell actually there's
been some experiments done by a
mathematician in his dog which proves
that the dog is actually really good at
calculus because it's the same problem I
said what he did was instead of somebody
drowning at sea
I'm he threw a stick into the sea and
then of course the dog can run faster
they can swim and he saw it did the
experiment again and again to see how
good the dog was by choosing the right
place and it was phenomenally good
actually doing some calculus in his head
solving this problem working out the
optimal place ransom is that dog so of
course the dog isn't well maybe the dog
is gonna do better than Dara I like this
story yeah let's go and have a look at
see whether he's got to the cap I was
gonna stand up no yeah okay we're gonna
go in hasslein hi Dora
hello how are you that's really ugly
it's really
yeah I actually think getting that pool
yeah yeah you'll get away of expressing
how you know how long that is how long
that is you compare it you can compare
themselves and go back with it so you
place to an answer oh god I haven't done
acids you know because I enjoyed this
this is clear this is really nice or
this one is like man this is really nice
because look at all what you kind of
make I make that point
therefore do - I sort of feel like I'm
my wife watching Rugby League there is
an element of sort of there is a
definite why those men doing them yeah I
will see how you did because I have an
idea of a trick my head Adam let's go
back to your proof I think I'm faster at
running
well at least me
the fastest way to save my new best
friend
do you notice by the way it got as you
did the running a lot brighter did you
do running and you jumped in right yeah
it was further away as long it got this
time for shorter yeah but there's a
point after which setting the times got
longer again there was the point was
very near yeah always the man swimming
is so bad Justin bad so I'm gonna call
time on this problem you to write down
the number of meters you need to run
before you plunge into the water as
Dara's put is a number between 0 and 75
yeah no no no I just think that 4 0 is
what we saw after all of that
experimenting what was the number of
meters you had to run the number yeah I
ran 60 meters okay the maths Department
sir how many meters did you run before
you plan your stint we can solve the
equation that's 65 yeah very much thank
you very interesting on this I wrote I
have no clue
and sometimes it's important to be
honest about this it's in there
somewhere and there is this thing if
this is the number line right generally
this thing will come down from here and
up and down and up and down or the three
turns yeah three turns and somebody not
on 75 there is a number here what's in
there tall in there so I'm right but
I've just kind of had kept it to myself
this is the actual graph of how far alex
runs along the edge of the pool against
RescueTime calculus is a study of change
and you use it to find the pointer which
the rescuetime stops going down and
starts going back up this is the best
place to jump in the water
where is well the number is so we can
maybe yeah yeah but see now I'm just
gonna do kind of bump Christopher you're
gonna go halfway to his in his like
because you're twice as far
dying because which I would say I don't
say 60 cuz that's
60 and 64 yeah okay I can't reveal that
the distance you have to run is sixty
point five eight that is very close to
almost right yeah around your the
actually lets it down you don't exactly
so I go right we can see you know six
goes six yeah that's a nice look the
fact is the fight we lived in
Renaissance Italy I would be acclaimed
as a guard for having get this far with
this if you solve that equation you
would have got sixty point five the dog
wins the dog and then generally of
course this show who's the winner Matt
okay go for Alex I'm sure thank you math
department for having slug to that you
set the problem thank you for that one
yes there's a titanic struggle but this
time we lose this time because my hand
me black boys you have a little riding
has explained the whole thing I look at
that as really nice no Amana can't even
swim has beaten maths into nothing I I'm
shattered and disgusted by that
nonetheless I'm happy with those who've
been here to my master bar alleged ever
who the same boudicca's like we're gonna
for setting the question which destroyed
science your remarks are so toy
for showing us for humbling us ladies
and gentlemen and our hundreds of years
of accumulated knowledge and we just
defeated by one we're sued and a very
nice hat ladies and gentlemen the man
who has destroyed science as we know it
we may burn the books let's just burn
because of him and here's a final
thirst-quenching but not quite
life-saving from you and 19 friends are
sitting around the table in the pub your
generous friend offers to buy 10 points
pieces starting from where he's sitting
every seventh person is going clockwise
around the table we'll get a punch so
where should people sits between sure
they get a drink if you want to see that
question again check the answer or just
cheat have a look on the website join
Dave Cote UK well hope you've not
forgotten your homework and of course
make sure you don't miss the new school
of hard somes
when it continues Monday night at eight
o'clock on Dave tomorrow from 10:00 it's
Tim Vine and Dave Gorman's one-night
stands next tonight though make the
wharf
you
but you got to run further presumably
than you're swimming because you're
swimming but it's judging exactly that
distance and I think Dara is gonna be
pushed into some pretty tough equations
to work this out actually the answer to
this problem is all of our trials it may
not be very sensible worth some sort of
outboard motor
but if Alex swims the maximum distance a
triangle with the right angle on one
corner a bit of old-school trigonometry
would tell us how far he had traveled
add in the speed of which he swims and
you can work out how long it'll take him
then any other combination of running
and swimming can be worked out the same
way with two triangles one for the
distance he runs and one for the
distance he swims added the speeds in
you have a total rescue time so that's
how you work out rescue time for one
entry point next we need to find a
faster route thankfully you're gonna see
a bit of calculus appearing it was
invented by two different people
independently one was Isaac Newton he
came up with the character sand but he
was very miffed because God for climates
in Germany came up with the same idea at
exactly the same time and there was this
bitter dispute about who discovered it
first and he just on the side me and
David rocky came up with the same joke
at the same time and is similar right
yeah so you're still fighting over there
yeah the joke is too soft on telly yeah
it's claimed it's yours yeah weddings
are expensive so we had our sponsored by
phone company did you do any calculus in
school I don't think so I did sort of
mess a little bit mess alright so here's
a little calculation what is 0/0 is it
the Mexican riding a bike 0/0
yeah I think when you do it on your
calculator it says that's when it the
letter e there they says yeah it's an
error it's funny thing is this is very
difficult wishing's and they really have
an answer um and but what the point is
that calculus makes sense of this answer
now you can use the calculator you're
accelerating a car and you're trying to
get to a 60 miles per hour in the
fastest time while you're accelerating
but all the time your speed is
constantly changing so if you do time
again
distance hmm so your speed is always
changing so if you say it one particular
time how fast you going how do you make
sense of that because remember speed is
distance divided by time miles per hour
yeah miles per hour you might say well
what's the average distance between
these two points I can take whether this
takes me a certain amount of time T and
in that time I've gone a distance D that
will give you the average speed but I
want for the exact speed at this
particular time it's a lovely graph it's
really good yeah
the calculus makes sense of this because
that's the time gets smaller and smaller
and smaller so if you think about the
speed is distance over time uh-huh well
it's time gets smaller and smaller and
smaller the distance is getting smaller
and smaller smaller so eventually uhit's
having to calculate zero over zero but
Newton and Leibniz made sense of this
and this actually tells you the
instantaneous speed of your car as
you're accelerating from nought to 60
right without the canvas you'll be able
to tell actually there's been some
experiments done by a mathematician in
his dog which proves that the dog is
actually really good at calculus because
it's the same problem I said what he did
was instead of somebody drowning at sea
I'm he threw a stick into the sea and
then of course the dog can run faster
they can swim and he saw he did the
experiment again and again to see how
good the dog was by choosing the right
place and it was phenomenally good I'm
actually doing some calculus in his head
solving this problem working out the
optimal place ransom so of course the
dog isn't well maybe the dog is gonna do
better than Dara I like this story yeah
let's go and have a look at see whether
he's got to the cap I was gonna stand up
yeah okay we're gonna go in a swing hi
Dora hello how are you it's really ugly
it's really yeah I actually think
getting that pool yeah yeah you'll get
away of expressing how you know how long
that is how long that is you I'm sure I
read that salt water is flammable is it
yeah I'm gonna use the words there is a
mathematical word triangles is it a
triangle could be yeah triangles is a
mathematical yeah I think we can break
it
oh no I guess it would so straight lines
are good on those straight lines
shortest distant that's the definition
of a straight line shortest distance
between two points so straight lines are
good well I'm thinking for some reason
yeah that should be a right angle
writing why would I be thinking that cuz
I know it's like Pythagoras line yeah go
triangle and that's kind of Greek maybe
you don't that kind of Greek thing
ancient Greek scene yeah yeah yeah okay
so we did this at 90 degrees let's see
what what effect that would have
can I just say what I'd do in real life
yeah what would you because I wouldn't
turn to math I would just serve screams
all right it's great I think I would
sort of hell I think I would run in the
direction of this I think I don't think
I know what to do here Marcus well we'll
leave them working for a while and take
a break we'll be back with the solution
to that particular problem and a big
problem for this week the woman we had
to send Alex had to do some stuff on
which is why he ended up doing decibel
you
welcome back to Darwin school of art so
the programmer fits me using brains
against my fellow comic using brawn in
this case it's Alex Horne in a bottle
find out which method is best for
solving the problems modern life throws
at us all welcome back to school of hard
Stone's these two are still trying to
work out what the quickest way to get to
a burning Cabana is that's fun of
they've got an answer Whitney cosa no
it's still very much an inferno sorry
about that yeah time's running out yes
for this portal you make us see who the
muted screams well yeah she's what a
snooker shot a pool shot would bounce
off that and hit - exactly it might not
affect it well yeah can I then do this
sort of thing yeah you can you can do
all of that yeah it's you know you're
lining up things this is more you know
it's one phone the ground I mean if keep
one foot on the ground and Snooky well
when you paint the shop I know when
you're lining up you can levitate when
you're lining up you can you can
actually mount the referee anyway right
now we're just looking at there's a wipe
all there and a red pool there yeah this
is great
we've put in terms you can understand
that but can I put spin on the map no
you guys you have to make it right in
the middle of the cube are you going to
give us a point where you're gonna hate
this
are you know there are still have you
next time oh yes think we hit it is
listen to some it's instinct that's what
you meant to be doing
it's got me yeah well that's not gulp
sure yeah let's go from yeah let's go
for that one so good so that that's your
snooker shot I feel like some angles
should be equal to other angles that's
very true yes what's six inches yeah I
do quickly I do any of these kind of
things seven stupid able is you reflect
us around the board right you pretend
that the thing isn't there we saw what
you do is right so that if that's if
that's what the house is they're right
and it's be from here like whatever
distance you just presume on the same
line
carry it out throw it out there and then
because it's exactly the same thing you
go from there to there and that gives
you the point that we do have to bounce
basically your flipper and legs I'm just
getting I'll oh yeah you get a friend to
swim out the exact is the dog shed on
fire
yeah you look at them you're set on fire
they didn't only for the lighter to be
on fire don't people have lied on fire
at their the salt water would go on fire
yeah we go and the whole thing be gone
but that gives you the anger where it
bounces around yeah I like that you've
written the word help on your mind FSS
apparel and that it's flame formation
Marc meaning danger rather than humor
yes exactly
okay guys so that's how you do you find
it you fell upon your best is off that's
all very well and good Marcus why don't
give us a problem we can really go to
cheat engine you're in a wetsuit
just for the break any particular reason
for that I've never been in a wetsuit
before and I think I'll pull it off and
I've really enjoyed the sensations that
it provided but okay okay this is
possible I'll tell you there is a way to
do it well I think you have to put two
in one of them so say if I put that one
in there and that one in there mm-hmm I
just go let's do that's okay so you want
to put so that means if you if you shine
in that one and it says this is a poison
that I know it's one of these - yeah so
should I put one of these two in that
one as well well that's that's you're on
fire is that bad or good that's good in
this kind of game where we know I think
I've got it yeah well I think I put this
one yeah I was gonna go for it go for it
in this one as well yeah so that's now
both them yes so if you shine a lot of
that yeah and they start this light up
then it's definitely that one very good
if one lights up it's that yeah that I
stuff at that and if none then it's that
okay let's have a game studio lights so
there is poison in this test tube here
and none in that one there so I think
that means it's that one what is the
mathematics behind no I just wrote four
cups two test tubes these eight but a.m.
one be another and seeing both and E is
there more profound more general Sutra
found behind this which is the
mathematics of binary numbers so binary
numbers you can only use zeros and ones
great for computing so what were you
going to do is to give these cups names
you called am ABC yeah and D but I'm
going to call them zero one two three
but I'm gonna write it in binary so zero
in binary is zero zero
yeah
cup one is 0-1 but I now can't write -
because you're any now zeros on one so I
carry up so this cup is 1 0 and this cup
is cup 3 which is 1 1 11 exactly
so binary is a way of expressing any
number using just zeros and ones if we
number the glasses 0 1 2 & 3 then in
binary they look like this let's say
each column of numbers represents a test
true if there's a 1 in the test tube and
we add a liquid from that glass drink 3
is in both contestants only drink 2 is
the left chest tube and only drink one
is in the right half cheaper when we
shine the light in the tubes it's both
flow then we know it's drink 3 if none
glow it's zero and it's only one tube we
know which drink that is as well
represented here is if you put so we go
this way don't put any of this one in
put this one in the unit's column so
this is a binary number put this one in
the twos column and this one in both of
them
you read it off you actually get the
binary representation of the number two
which includes did you use some binary
numbers over there we didn't use binary
no stuff yeah that's easy I'm not seeing
anybody
yeah what's the next so this question
it's all about a burning beach hut so
this problem is all about term saving
lives again using some maths but now
you've got to save somebody from a
burning beach hut because you're saying
yourself on the beach enjoying yourself
and sunny you notice this beach hut on
fire on the other side of the beach now
if you're gonna put out the fire you've
got to get some water so the question is
that how to put out the fire in the
quickest way in fact I've got a little
area set up on the table too so we can
wow this is for you Alex to do some I've
never went to the beach never been on
the boat don't trust boats and mum
wouldn't let me give him cuz of the
grain forget under my nails she said she
kept saying we'll go onto your nails
Alex we're not going it's not this is
true a wall put in the sand of the sea
right there's many things which are not
representative of a beach yes very
sunburned yeah you are yeah you've been
there too long
yeah you've a really large book at the
same time so you have to get to there
via there that's right you've got to
find you know where you're gonna hit do
you head straight to the water or you so
that's the question what's the best
place to aim for well they say you can
go
in a while
darian welcome to my school of hard sons
and this is a third level academic
institution specifically set up with one
task in mind
find out when tackling a series of
practical problems which is better thank
you find some clever approach them smart
maxi basting or to just hammer it out by
trial and error by brute force this show
is the classic Battle of brains versus
brawn because when it comes to solving
problems I'm a firm believer in using
maths I love math it can solve pretty
much any problem from saving lines or
placing a bet to surviving a zombie
apocalypse tonight I'll be using brain
work and some pens to tackle three
genuine real-world problems set by
Oxford professor Marcus is so true and
my comedy guests will be using their
brawn or whatever else is lying around
to try and do the same we've got a
couple of math students present to keep
me on my toes because none of us have
seen the questions and we might not get
an answer at all but first let's meet
this week's guest
that's how are you it just in case
you're a ringer in this situation do
you've any mathematics background any
kind of science background no I don't
really I don't like it I more into
things like football and kissing okay
definitely they weren't in either or by
the way is a large part of what we want
to get across here is that it's not you
know it's a monastery you go into a
choice about six maths or mathematics in
football I mean all those triangles you
know fàbregas passing this room yeah
absolutely some numbers to even do the
score babe yeah no I yeah I think when
they're kicking that ball and what they
mainly think is angles no they're mainly
thinking what their people's velocity
momentum yeah they think of space yeah I
next a fundamental instinctive level but
you do like the all arcane thing some
arid dry you know perceived as not cool
type subject to Latin the universities I
thought was spoken in Latin America
there was a shock when you were going
everyoneís because it was now dead
except the Pope that was upsetting yeah
so yeah no I think they asked have
latinum ass
I think lasting a master of karate
they're all kind of very sides are the
same
yeah weirdly shaped a normal life you
don't use them if you do people think
you're a bit odd bugs you have problems
for us but they usually group the other
team yeah we don't seem today which sits
the mess of saving lives okay what is
the first part yes I got a warm-up
question to get the the brain cells
firing and this one is about poison so
I've got some poison on the table here
and you gotta use a bit of mass to stop
yourself being poisoned okay so one of
these glasses contains poison the other
three are safe okay and you've got to
try and find out which one of these is
poison cause I'm gonna get you to drink
the other three okay did you get it
wrong this is a very short show yeah
just for the record I hate poison
that's a good starter for this problem
we've got two test tubes here yeah when
I shine this light it will tell you
which of these test tubes has poisoned I
can only use this light once to detect
the poison where the poison is which of
these test juice we're gonna do it
practically the guy who's got a poison
himself but you're safe over there just
waiting come on Izzy cease already got
variable so what we've got here are four
glasses and we know one of them is
poison all you have to detect the poison
are two test tubes and a one chance only
poison detecting light how do you find
the point variable I'm drawing pictures
of containers of this in there okay
going in really yeah okay so I think
this is all about some in the test tube
which is my favorite oh it has been my
favorite type of tube the test you so
can you shine your light of that noise
oh no no I'm only out to do it once so
do you want to try it now yeah yeah
sorry
right can I ask a question yeah doing it
can we put different amounts in you can
put different amounts in but it won't
make any difference because it's a kind
oh really
yeah once I yeah this sorry that is all
now rubbish right my students they've
gathered everything gathered everything
in that yeah yeah so just yeah there
were some bulges yeah anyway I am also
thinking I don't make it all about me
but I think I look really good in a
little for me how nice very very good
how is this possibly open to the problem
because Alex was actually saving
somebody's life he was playing a
lifeguard in this problem yeah and what
you've got to do is you suddenly it's a
holiday from he'll this one because
you've got to save another life you're
at the pool you've certainly seen
somebody in distress holiday in which a
Cabana a wet on fire that's right so the
cabanas gonna fire at you retire to the
pool yeah you retired a pool hoping to
finish that novel and unfortunately
there's somebody in distress in a
swimming pool
that's your distal people to see what
it's actually physically looks like yeah
see this here so you can find some
you're here yeah but you wake up reading
the girl which is dragon for a face
which I've been means you breacher for
ages so finally getting ready reading
that you're 2 meters away from the edge
of the pool yep from this point here to
the where the person is lined up that's
75 meters yep and then the person who's
in distress is 25 meters in okay
and run twice as fast as you can swim
fun you have to calculate where is the
best place to plunge into the water to
be able to rescue this poor person in
distress right till person drowning here
lifeguard here running is twice as fast
as swimming what's the biggest duty so
dive gracefully rather than plunge to
I've done this and you'll see it's like
a sea ice let's have a look this is Alex
attending this problem you won't catch
me doing any calculations or sums
I'm gonna be working this out using
trial and error a lot of error in case
you're wondering and you'll be noting
down how long each attempt takes me so
eventually we can come up with an answer
to the ribbon 75 meters along 25 meters
out here we go
Ashley see the numbers this is where the
traveling is gonna write this is Jeremy
for real dummy in distress doesn't look
that distress he's the type that bottles
things up think I thought right then
Here I am in real swimming pool in real
wetsuits about risk to a real dummy in
distress
this man here who is a proper lifeguard
is deadly we'll be keeping an eye on me
he'll from safety was very forth
obviously this is not top gear so we all
know we're not allowed to run at the
swimming pool or do bombing or petting
or food did I have scientific
dispossession today so I will be running
to
I'm pretty or for this so I can't help
thinking that running would be quicker
all right then I've good runs it's two
below Bronx I've got pebble so what I
try next bit more runny bit less with me
yeah
Oh shame and species for swimming really
that's the trouble
no fish are really good they're built
there's really hope you put them the
lands exactly walking on the trail what
does haven't raced in some way take Alex
over here we're gonna laugh your calculi
do that please yeah I think this is a
really tough problem do you have any
sort of ideas about how to do this well
the trouble is that you saw in the video
the Hat was so tight it's very hard to
think I was just thinking save Jeremy
you know but you did get the idea